In the previous lecture, we solved the all
pairs shortest path problem by using the Floyd-Warshall
algorithm. It had a time complexity of O(|V|^3).
And because the number of edges doesn't impact
the running time, we concluded that it's well-suited
for dense graphs. However, for sparse graphs,
we can find a more efficient algorithm, the
one we will see in this lecture: The Johnson's
algorithm. Previously, we studied the Dijkstra's
algorithm, it produces the shortest path from
a single vertex to each vertex. We can think
of using it to solve the all pairs shortest
path problem, by calling it starting from
each vertex. However, we have the negative
edges problem, Dijkstra's algorithm doesn't
work well with negative edges, and we want
our solution to handle negative edges. For
that, Johnson's algorithm starts by eliminating
negative edges, then proceeds to call Dijkstra's
on each vertex, it's a two steps process.
We already know about Dijkstra's algorithm,
but how to remove negative edges? By removing
negative edges we don't mean removing them
completely from the graph, which may give
wrong results, we just mean updating their
values to not be negative anymore. A simple
solution we may think of is to identify the
smallest weight, subtract it from all edges,
and we have no negative edges anymore. For
example for this graph, the smallest weight
is -3. We subtract -3 from all edges' weights,
which is equivalent to adding 3, and we get
this updated graph, it doesn't contain negative
edges anymore. But, you need to know that
we cannot update weights in any way, we have
to do it in a way that preserves shortest
paths. So if the shortest path from A to E
was A-B-C-E before updating, it must remain
A-B-C-E after updating. Let's see if it's
the case for our updated graph. Before updating,
the shortest path from A to E was ABCE. However,
after updating, the shortest path from A to
E changed, it became ADE. Which is wrong,
our method of removing negative edges is wrong,
it shouldn't alter shortest paths. The way
we update weights should, for each pair (s,t),
add the same weight for every path that goes
from s to t, to keep things right. Which,
unfortunately, was not the case here. This
is why we will see another way of updating,
it's the one Johnson's algorithm uses. We
start by adding a new vertex q. We add an
edge of weight 0 from q to each other vertex.
And using Bellman-Ford algorithm, we calculate
the shortest distance from q to each vertex,
that we put in a table named h, so h[v] represents
the shortest distance from q to v. Then we
remove q from the graph, and for each edge
(u, v, w), we reweight w with this formula:
w(u,v) = w(u,v) + h[u] - h[v]. With this example
we get this updated graph. As you can see,
it contains no negative weights, and for each
couple (s, t), it added the same weight for
each path that goes from s to t, and we will
prove it. We need to prove two things, that
all edges won't have a negative weight, and
that for each couple of vertices (s, t), it
adds the same weight for each path that goes
from s to t. Let's start with the first one.
First of all, we don't have to worry about
negative cycles, because they would be detected
in the first step, where we use Bellman-Ford,
remember that Bellman-Ford detects negative
cycles. Imagine that we have an edge (u, v,
w). We want to prove that the updated weight,
w(u,v) + h[u] - h[v], is greater than or equal
to 0. We have two cases: The first case is
when the shortest path from q to v, whose
length is h[v], passes from u and takes the
edge (u, v). So h[v] would be equal to h[u]+w(u,v).
Which means that the shortest path from q
to v is the shortest path from q to u, + the
edge (u,v). The condition holds. And the second
case is when the shortest path from q to v
is found somewhere else. By definition, it's
the shortest path, there is no path that has
a smaller weight. Which means that the path
that passes from u then takes the edge (u,v)
cannot be shorter, so its length, h[u]+w(u,v),
is greater than or equal to h[v], because
h[v] is the shortest distance. We take h[v]
to the other side, and the condition holds.
From these two cases, we deduce that updated
weights are not negative. Beauty of mathematics.
Second thing to prove, that given a couple
(s, t), applying reweighting this way adds
the same weight to each path from s to t.
A path from s to t, starts from s, then passes
from some vertices, then ends at t. We can
define it with the list of edges it passes
from. The first one is (s, p0), because it
starts from s. Then we have the edge (p0,
p1), then the edge (p1, p2), and so on and
so on, then the edge (pn-1, pn), and finally
the edge (pn, t), it ends at t. The weight
of a path is simply the sum of weights of
its edges, here we have w(s, p0) + w(p0, p1)
+ ... + w(pn-1, pn) + w(pn, t). This is before
reweighting. When reweighting, for each edge
(u, v), we're adding h[u] - h[v] to its weight.
In the expression, w(s, p0) becomes w(s, p0)
+ h[s] - h[p0]. w(p0, p1) becomes w(p0, p1)
+ h[p0] - h[p1]. And so on and so on, w(pn,
t) becomes w(pn, t) + h[pn] - h[t]. Let's
change position of elements. And here, we
can start cancelling opposite terms, we cancel
- h[p0] and + h[p0], we cancel - h[p1] and
+ h[p1], and so on and so on, and we cancel
- h[pn] + h[pn]. What remains is the sum of
weights of edges, which was the weight of
the path before reweighting, + h[s] - h[t].
And we proved that for each couple (s, t),
no matter what intermediate vertices we take
to go from s to t, in other words, no matter
what vertices the path is made of, the same
weight will be added, h[s] - h[t], so it's
guaranteed that the shortest path will not
change. It's like we have a list of people
and Aimen is the poorest one, if we give them
the same cash bonus, Aimen will still be the
poorest. We proved the two properties, so
our reweighting technique works, Johnson's
algorithm works. Now that we're done with
reweighting, we apply Dijkstra's algorithm
starting from each vertex, and we put everything
in two hash tables dist and prev. But here
we got distances of the updated graph, we
want distances of the original graph, this
is why we have to apply a modification to
dist table. To update weights w(u, v), we
added h[u] - h[v]. So to do the inverse operation
and go back to the original weights, we subtract
h[u] - h[v], which is equivalent to adding
h[v] - h[u]. This is why for each couple (u,v),
we update dist[u][v] by adding h[v] - h[u],
to get shortest distances in the original
graph. And this is how Johnson's algorithm
works. Let's implement all of this. First,
because we will modify the graph, it's better
to copy it, to not modify the one we passed
as parameter. Then we add a vertex q, by creating
a key for it in the graph. After it, we add
an edge from q to u of weight 0 for each vertex
u. Then, we get the h table by using Bellman-ford
starting from the vertex q. Now if h is null,
then bellman-ford returned null, we have a
negative cycle, we directly exit by returning
null. Else, we reweight edges, for each edge
(u, v) with a weight w, w becomes w + h[u]
- h[v]. Then we can delete the vertex q, we
don't need it anymore. Now we create two hash
tables dist and prev. And for each vertex
u, we apply Dijkstra's algorithm starting
from it. We get a distances table, that we
put in dist[u], and a previous table, that
we put in prev[u]. Last step, to get distances
of the original graph and not the updated
one, we traverse all possible couples of vertices
(u, v), and we update dist[u][v], we add to
it h[v] - h[u]. We're done, we return dist
and prev tables. For path reconstruction,
we make a function that takes as parameters
prev table, source and destination. If source
is equal to destination, we return a path
with source only, the shortest path from a
vertex to itself is by staying on itself.
Else if prev[src][dest] is null, then we don't
have a path at all from source to destination,
we return an empty array. Else, we keep moving
backwards as in Dijkstra and Bellman-Ford,
we create an array path with destination in
it, we create a temporary vertex to move that
starts at dest, and while prev[src][vertex]
exists, we go to it, and we add it to the
path. After the loop we return the path reversed,
to get the right order of vertices. And we're
done implementing Johnson's algorithm. For
the time complexity, we have |V|+|E| for copying
the graph, because we traverse it, |V| for
adding edges from q to vertices, |V||E| for
Bellman-Ford, |V|+|E| for traversing edges
and reweighting them, then we call Dijkstra's
starting from each vertex. So we traverse
the |V| vertices, and for each vertex, we
have |E|+|V|log|V|, the time complexity of
Dijkstra's algorithm. And finally, we have
|V|² for traversing all couples of vertices.
In total, we get this sum. We simplify it,
and we get an O(|V||E|+|V|²log|V|) time complexity
for Johnson's algorithm. Which is more efficient
for sparse graphs than Floyd-Warshall. We've
reached the end of this lecture, I hope that
you understood how Johnson's algorithm works,
ask questions if you didn't, and see you in
the next lecture.